From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
91 recorded live Monday, December 3rd, 2007.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by Tellerik rad controls.
The most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelbrik.com. Support
is also provided by.net developers
journal the world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott discusses, he clips
with Bjorn Freeman Benson. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I am
privileged to be sitting down
here with Bjorn Freeman Benson,
the director of committer community
at the eclipse foundation. Thank
you, sir, for taking the
time out of your busy
schedule. Yeah, no problem. So
most people who listen to
this podcast are Microsoft developers.
Although audience is starting to
expand a little bit and
they know that eclipse is
a thing that's out there,
but for the most part,
they may not have necessarily
experienced it in their everyday
life. But eclipse is a
huge part of, of a
great deal of developers' lives
from, from day to day.
What should a Microsoft developer
know about eclipse? Well, yeah,
sort of a large question.
Big question. Eclipse is probably
the most popular. I think
we actually have stats somewhere
that demonstrate that it is
the most popular Java IDE.
Now eclipse has expanded to
be more than just a
job ID, but it's best
known for being a job
ID. So since a lot
of Microsoft developers work in
C sharp and that sort
of thing, they don't work
in Java. The, you know,
they don't have that familiarity
with eclipse, whereas people who,
who build Java applications, web
servers, clients, rich clients, and
so on all know about
eclipse, even if they don't
use it, if even if
they use one of the
other tools out there as
a developer, you might consider
eclipse to be sort of
the Java version of visual
studio. Visual studio is the
800 pound gorilla. It's the,
the main development environment that
you use. If you're a
windows programmer, even if you
happen to use one of
the other tools that are
out there, there's a wide
variety of them. Everybody knows
about visual studio, same thing
applies in the Java world.
If you're even if you
use one of the other
Java tools, you know, about
eclipse, as you know, it's
the main programming environment and
where did it come from
originally? Is there, is there
a Linus for eclipse? Who's
like the guy who made
it and then it became
a foundation or how did
it, so there, the history
of eclipse started as at
this little company, object technology
are known as OTI in
Ottawa, and I worked for
them for a while and
we made small talk programming
environments basically. And we made
a deal with IBM, even
when we were an independent
company and they sold it
as IBM small talk, which
was known as visual age,
small talk at the time.
And that same group after
being bought by IBM, went
on to produce the first
IBM Java programming environment, which
was called digital age for
Java, which was innovative, but
fairly weak in its execution
and had a number of
flaws. And then they went
on to make a new
version of that, which became
eclipse. Then IBM decided to
take that proprietary code that
they had in that. And
they were actually selling that
for family, couple thousands of
dollars and so on and
open source that for a
number of reasons, but that
became the open source eclipse
product that's out there. And
then after a few years
of that being just opened
under IBM's label, they decided
to spin it out to
a separate foundation, which is
where I work today, which
is a non IBM thing.
It's funded by the member
companies of the eclipse foundation
of which there are currently
120 member companies or maybe
130. I'm never quite sure
exactly what the number is.
And they all put in
varying amounts of money to
help run the foundation, maintain
the servers, provide the bandwidth,
you know, pay the salary
of myself and the few
other employees that are of
the foundation, et cetera. So
a foundation like this, an
open source foundation, isn't a,
isn't a behemoth. It's not
a huge thing. I mean,
I'm sitting here in your
offices, in downtown Portland, Oregon,
and, you know, with all
due respect, I was surprised
that it was so small.
Somehow I assumed it would
be mahogany walls and big
desks. And it's just you
and another gentlemen right now.
Yeah, there are actually four
of us here in Portland
and then there's another, I
think eight or nine in
Ottawa. We, we live in
the locations we live in
because we like living there.
I, I lived in Ottawa
for a while and decided
it was a bit cold.
So I prefer Portland. There
are people who, who like
living there for family reasons
or whatever, but the foundation
itself doesn't do the work.
It's not like Microsoft building
visual studio where Microsoft builds
all of the code in
there. Gosh, I don't even
know how many people there
are working on the visual
studio product, but I'm sure
it's in at least the
hundreds, if not a thousand,
right? The work of writing
the code for eclipse is
done by people out there
who typically work for our
member companies. And there are
800 to 900 of those
committers out there who work
on eclipse either part time
or full time. Wow. And
so those are the people
who are the committers on
the project. We have the
right access. There are more
people than that who contribute
patches and code and so
on, but I don't have
account for those. So the,
you know, the 12 or
so employees, the foundation do
things like system administration, keeping
the servers up, making sure
that elections are run fairly
and things like that. Carl
who's sitting over there to
my right is one of
our assistant and is busy
fixing a problem with, I
think the website at this
very moment. Wow. But he,
and I don't actually write
the code. Those are done
by the eight or 900
developers are out there. And
is there other internet, a
hundred? Is there other leads?
I mean, how is that
structured? Is there a hierarchy?
There is a hierarchy, but
it's a, it's a meritocratic
hierarchy. So we've currently divided
up into, I think, 80
different sub projects around the
entire eclipse philosophy. I could
go over to the web
browser and look it up.
We have a page that
lists them all. But for
instance, there's a sub project
that deals with Java tooling
and there's a sub project
that deals with sea tooling.
So project that deals with
UML diagramming and so on.
And each one of those
is run by between two
and 20 people. And those
two and 20 people self
select a leader among them
that they are, they want
to follow. So each one
of those projects has a
project lead or sometimes co-leads
who sort of define where
the project is going to
go and what things are
going to be worked on
how to triage the bugs
and that sort of thing.
But it's all done by,
you know, if you and
I are sitting together working
on some project and we
decide that you're better to
lead the project, we go,
okay, okay. Now you're the
leader. And off you go,
and then, you know, maybe
later you get tired of
doing that and this has
happened to eclipse. You know,
you've got other things to
do in your life. And
so then I become the
leader for a while because
everybody says, well, you know,
you're the guy who knows
the architecture, you go off
and do it. And for
the most part, these are
people who are using eclipse
and they're fixing eclipse. I
mean, they're using it in
their everyday life. Their job
may not necessarily be full
time to be a committer
on eclipse or Yeah. Everybody
who's using the, or who's
working on the eclipse environment
is also using the eclipse
environment. I think it would
be really hard to be
a developer on eclipse if
you weren't using it in
everyday life, I suppose it's
possible, but Full time. I
mean these member companies. So
I mean, I'm a, I
assume a member company becomes
a member company cause they
have some deep investment in
eclipse they're using it or
they feel they're not just
doing it out of to
be philanthropic. Well, it could
be, I haven't actually spoken
with them and asked each
one of them, why are
you doing this? Although I
have to believe that most
of them are doing it
because they have some corporate
market-based reason for doing that.
It would, it wouldn't make
a lot of sense for
that many companies to just
go out and donate time
for no particular reason. So
I'm positive, you know, my
belief without having done any
interviews that they're all doing
that for some corporate reason
that trying to make money.
One of the interesting things
about eclipse as an open
source foundation versus other open
source foundations is that we're
an explicitly commercial opensource group.
Our goal is for all
of our member companies to
be able to make money
with the open source that's
out there. Our goal isn't
necessarily to give away free
software. Although there are sort
of a, I was going
to say a vicious cycle,
but it's not really vicious
a, a reinforcing cycle of,
you know, if we have
enough users who are using
the free stuff that provides
a market, which enables the
companies to sell additional products
on top of that market
or services or something. But
we're definitely aiming at our
goal is for companies to
make money on top of
the things that are out
there. So let's say that
I, and forgive me my
ignorance here, because I'm trying
to get my head around
this. Let's say that I
want to start a company
around this new LOL code
that I just, that had
been released. This is the
funny cats that speak funny
languages, and I've developed this
new language and we have
no idea though. All the
LOL code is being written
in notepad. I could take
a eclipse and extend it,
add plugins, add understanding of
this environment, Right? So you
would want to add the,
you would want to add
the plugins that would make
an IDE for LOL code.
And in fact, we have
a new project at eclipse
that helps you do that.
You basically define the syntax
and the semantics of language,
and it generates an IDE
for you around whatever language
you've typed in. Wow. Now,
you know, obviously the IDs
is not as polished as
say, you might find in
visual studio where you've had
hundreds of people working on
all the little details, but
it whips out the basic
structure for you in, in
fairly quick order. So then
you can make your LOL
code IDE on top of
the clip. And does it
say eclipse, or does it
say Scott seller L code
ID? I mean, how much
I can brand this really?
I mean, then I can
go and sell it. You
can brand it as much
as you want. And some
people do there are we,
we found that generally in
the embedded space companies tend
to build a branded IDE
on top of eclipse that
you know, is eclipse. If
you're good at it, cause
you sort of look at
you go, Oh, that looks
like eclipse windows, but it
doesn't say eclipse anywhere. And
that in the server side
space, 10 people tend to
build on top of eclipse
and then add extensions to
that. So it says eclipse,
but then with their extensions
on top of it, Probably
because I think in the
server space, the name eclipse
holds some, some weight in
some sense of quality and
we're, we're, we're getting something
that we can count on.
So they, they will, they
feel the developer who's consuming
that end product feels comfort
and that this is built
on eclipse. Yeah, that could
be. The other thing we
found is that companies, when
they first moved to using
eclipse as an open source
platform, feel that they need
to put a brand around
the whole thing. So they
worked very hard to make
it, their own thing just
happens to be built on
top of eclipse and then
relatively quickly their customers say,
Oh, I see it's built
on top of eclipse. I'd
like to use this other
tool, which has also built
on top of eclipse in
combination with your tool. And
the first company goes, well,
we didn't anticipate that. So
there's not really a way
to do that. And then
their customers drive them into
being more open and allowing
the customers to combine different
tools from different vendors. And
that turns out to be
a great attraction for the
customers. And then they try
and buy more tools that
are based on eclipse because
they have this ability to
combine them. So there is
there a distinct difference between
the autogeneration of the branded
IDE on the one side
and the extending eclipse proper
through extensions? Well, what it
ends up being is do
you have an installer and
that creates an exe that
you double click to start
it up, or do you
take an existing eclipse image
and install plugins into that?
That's sort of the, I
see, I see. And what
are the licensing requirements? If
I was going to go
make my LOL code eclipse
ID, do I have to
pay you two? Who do
I pay? All of the
eclipse code is licensed. All
of the eclipse open source
code is licensed under the
eclipse public license, which is
one of these licenses, which
requires that if you modify
the code, you distribute the
modifica modified code, but it's
not viral in the GPL
sense where it doesn't attach
itself to all the rest
of your code. So this
means that you can write
commercially licensed plugins and ship
them with eclipse and that
your commercially licensed plugins don't
become polluted by the EPL.
But if I had to
modify eclipse to do it
Right, if you modify the
basic lips code, the EPL
says that you then have
to release that basic clips
modifications out to the world
to help the rest of
the world. Hmm. And that
I wouldn't have to do
the, I wouldn't have to
ship the source code to
my extension. Absolutely not. So
one of the things that
I thought would be of
interest to some of the
Microsoft developers that are listening,
is this really amazing ID
based on eclipse called Aptana.
That is a JavaScript ID.
And I didn't know it
was eclipse until I noticed
some of the windows and
the buttons. And I said,
wow, that really looks like
a clips went into the
preferences and noticed that it
was built as an add
on. Now they've built both
a community edition and a
pro edition. Is that a
real common way for a
commercial company to still have
a foot and open source
by open, by offering a
free version and then by
offering a commercially licensed version
all based on eclipse? Well,
I think it is. And
I actually think that when
you go that route, it's
you, you go back to
when we were building tools,
you know, 10, 15 years
ago, even visual studio had
a personal edition, a professional
edition in a enterprise edition.
I think where they were
called and the personal one
was low cost and the
professional one was more cost
and so on. And now
with this open source model
that Aptana is using and
various other people are using
the, the personal edition has
become free, right? And then
you have these more expensive
additions. I mean, IBM still
sells a version of eclipse
called rational application developer. You
know, it's eclipse with a
whole bunch more tools built
on top of it, which
so you can get eclipse,
which IBM is distributed now
through the foundation, it's no
longer an IBM thing. Or
you can buy rational application
developer, which is this full
featured, you know, suite of
tools for doing enterprise size
development. Hmm. And all these
are written in Java, all
these plugins that's the primary
plugin architecture for eclipse is
to write jar files and
write Java extensions. Yes. Currently
you have to write all
your extensions in Java. I,
you know, I, I wish
it were different. I wish
you could write your extensions
in any programming language, but
we have yet to actually
see that technology takeover. And
there are certain, there are
certain technical reasons why that
turns out to be difficult,
which if you have plenty
of time in your podcast,
we can go into, or
if you have another podcast
we could go into, but
I think it would be
great. For instance, if I
could be able to write
extensions in say JavaScript or
PHP, which I happen to
be doing a lot of.
Yeah. Or if I'm a
C sharp programmer, if I
were to write my extensions
in C sharp and have
them work on eclipse, right.
Because there are people out
there who want to use
eclipse, who don't have necessarily
a lot of Java experience.
The Aptana example is great.
Those people are really sharp
people. They have a great
community built around that product,
but a lot of those
people are either Ruby programmers,
cause Aptamil also does Ruby
or JavaScript programmers, neither of
which translates directly to being
a Java programmer. So it'd
be great if those people
could write extensions to eclipse
in their own language, but
we don't have that technology
yet. Yeah. It seems like
it would be good if
there was some kind of
a, a, and I'm thinking
of the Firefox kind of
Zul XUL method of extension
where there's a, a manifest
of some kind, an XML
manifest that then in the
system will handle the instantiation
of whatever those objects and
the bridging such that one
could build an abstraction layer
that was generic across all
IDs. So that one could
build a plugin that would
work in both official studio
and in eclipse and in
whatever. But perhaps that's the
view of a utopian future.
That'll never, Well, I have
that same utopian view. So
I'm glad to hear you
express that. I, cause I
think there's a lot of
things that IDs do that
are common across all the
IVs, that it would be
handy if we didn't have
to reinvent them over and
over again. And one of
the reason that Z eclipse
exists in the first place
is because a lot of
the vendors in the Java
IDE space looked around and
said, Hey, we're building the
same tools for connecting to
say CVS. And you're building
the same tools and this
other guy's building the same
tools. Why don't we get
together and just build them
once. And then we can
spend our energies building the
quality product quality things on
top of it, rather than
reinventing the same base stuff
over and over again. And
I think that as IDs
get more sophisticated and visual
studio gets more sophisticated and
eclipse tries to keep up
or wherever you want to
make that, that dividing line,
there are a larger and
larger base of those things
that we could do in
common between not just visual
studio, eclipse, but eclipse and,
and some of the other,
you know, there's intelligi, which
is another popular Java environment,
which has a lot of
great stuff in it, but
they must also do a
lot of the same basic
things and have plugins. Right.
It's really interesting to watch
the community kind of self-correct
because I feel like on
one really far side of
the extreme view of the
people who believe that everything
should be open sourced and
that, you know, free software
completely. And then of course
the other side is that
everything should be commercial, but
somewhere in the middle of
the community decides where the
current water level is and
where things below that water
level should be free. And
there's just kind of an
expectation of free that is
kind of in the, in
the ether. You can't quite
get your finger on it,
but the community ultimately decides
that, you know, I think
syntax highlighting IntelliSense editors. I
think we can all agree
are something that we shouldn't
have to pay for much
for, and there should be
value added on top of
that before I will pay
my a hundred bucks. Right.
And then when you bring
up the concept of free,
there's free as in, it's
no cost to me because
it's such a common idea
that, that everybody has implemented
it now. And you know,
when I went to university
syntax highlighting was a big
deal. It was the sort
of thing we studied and
now, you know, syntax highlighting
twelve-year-olds do that, you know,
on their, in their spare
time. Right? And so then
there's also the concept of
free as in free choice.
And one of the things
that eclipse does, which I
think is really remarkable is
it allows you to choose
whether you want to pay
for something or not pay
for something. So let me
give you an example of
support. There are companies in
the eclipse ecosystem that will,
you can pay them to
support eclipse for you, or
if you choose not to
buy support, you could fix
the bugs yourself because all
of the source code is
available. Or if you choose
not to do that, you
could submit bugs through bug
Zilla, to eclipse and hope
that people in the projects
fix them. So you can
choose time waiting for people
to fix them. You can
choose doing it yourself, or
you can choose money where
you pay someone to do
it right. And so you
have the opportunity to choose
which way that's going to
be. And I think that's
one of the real powers
of open source is that
it gives you that choice
to how to spend your
time and money. It doesn't
force you into a particular
vendor's model of, well, you
have to pay for support,
or you have to wait
two years for the next
version or whatever it is.
I think that that's about
the best definition of the
essence of open opensource means
that I've heard in a
long time. I mean, that
really resonates to me. I
think that the perspective that
it should be free and
that the committers should jump
on every support thing while
they're working on the next
version is an unreasonable expectation
that it appears that some
proponents of open sourcing to
have that kind of an
opinion, Right? And, and we
at eclipse definitely don't. We
acknowledge that each one of
our member companies supplies people
to work on the various
projects. And typically those, those
people who work on the
projects have a belief in
open source. So they wouldn't
be working on it. But
at the same time, they
work for some corporation that
has particular goals in mind
about where the next generation
of modeling tools should go
for instance. And so if
you are, if your needs
correspond to their needs and
their belief in the system,
then you're in great shape.
And if they don't, you
have the opportunity to choose
some other path well, staying
with the eclipse foundation, you
can either make a new
plugin. You can modify the
plugin, you could join the
project yourself and help guide
it. You could, As a
person who's worked for Microsoft
for just about two months
now, it's interesting to watch
some of the discussions internally
because some of the, the,
the younger people and youngers
and kind of air quotes,
people who haven't been at
Microsoft for 15, 20 years
in different meetings at every
opportunity, someone says, well, how
can we get that source
out? Which is really unexpected.
I did not expect to
be in these meetings where
someone would say, we're going
to write XYZ. And we
got to figure out some
way to get source out.
And it turns out that
the things that are preventing
us from doing that are
all of the infrastructure and
the legal and this and
that. And the years of,
of Microsoft newness working against
it. You know, they just
released the.net framework as a
reference license. And apparently it
took like two years of
legal wrangling to get to,
okay, that, and I wanted
to get just a little
widget. It's just a little
scroll bar benefit, little add
in that a guy at
Microsoft is working on released,
and I've been there on
and off working on this
for two months to get
this silly little DLL with
a silly little feature out.
And it's been released meetings
and legal review and writing
ULAs and back and forth.
But the fact that people
at Microsoft are willing to,
to work for them. I
think we'll move Microsoft, hopefully
more towards a company that
looks like some of these
member companies that, that you're
describing. Yeah. And I think
a key thing there that
I think that developers who
just walk into this without
thinking about the deeper issues
don't realize is that we
still all need to, we
need to make money. And
somehow in the end, you
need to be paid. I
need to be paid. The
price of gas is going
up. I need to be
paid more. So there needs
to be some model where
even if we're making something
open, there's still a way
for revenue to flow in
one way or another. And
different companies have chosen different
models around that, around open
source, but just giving everything
away for no cost is
not gonna work. Right. And
there are many good reasons
to make your, your software
open source. And obviously since
I work for an opensource
foundation, I, I believe in
them, but I don't believe
in giving everything away. And
I was just giving a
talk last week to another
company. And I was saying,
well, one thing you don't
want to give away is
your core competency. You know,
the thing that, that that's
the driving factor that makes
all the money for your
company. You don't want to
give that away. I worked
for a company for a
while that contracted with a
large shipping container affirm and
their core competency is scheduling
shipping containers to minimize inventory
and warehouses. It's a really
interesting problem, but basically the,
the inventory of, of their
customers floats around the ocean
and these shipping containers and
can arrive at destinations at
the right time. That algorithm
is where they make all
their money. The rest of
it is not actually interesting,
but there's no way that
they would ship that algorithm
out as open source because
then their competitors could all
have that exact same algorithm.
Exactly, exactly. That's the algorithm
that the, the chief architect
has an, a plaque with
a patent underneath it, hanging
above his desk, right. Handcuffed
to it, but maybe 25
years from now, when 12
year old start scheduling shipping
containers, then there's a new
problem that we want to
crack. And that does get
open-sourced. Exactly. Yeah. I want
to take a little bit
of a, of a, of
a 90 degree left turn,
because whenever I get the
opportunity to talk to someone
who's been in the industry
for decades, plural like yourself,
who has not only a
lot of experience, but also
an advanced degree in these
kinds of things, I'm interested
in your perspective on where
you think language is going.
Because as a person who
has a computer science background,
but not an advanced degree,
I'm always interested in some
of the, the, the language
innovations like around, you know,
C-sharp adding link and visual
basic adding XML, some of
the arguments that are happening
between the Java purists and
the Java pragmatists as, as
languages that are being developed.
And you've gone to
many times. Do you think
that we're breaking some, some
rules, are there absolute rules,
like the, kind of the
Bucci and rules that shouldn't
be shouldn't be touched? Or
is it okay that we're
changing these languages in ways
that aren't, you know, pure
and the kind of eighties
old kind of sense of
the word? The interesting thing
is I am both a
pragmatist and a purist in
this, in an interesting combination.
I think that languages should
provide us with the pragmatic
bits to allow us to
express our algorithms as quickly
and as succinctly as possible.
I program in Java a
lot, because eclipse is written
in Java, and I find
it at times frustrating and
how verbose I have to
be to do what appear
to be simple things. The
language shouldn't be doing that
to me, it should make
it as easy as possible
to do things. I think
link is great because it
makes it so that I
don't have to write a
lot of verbosity to get
the simple concepts that I
want in terms of database
queries. I link the visual
basic XML syntax also. I
mean, if you've ever tried
to do XML processing in
Java, it's just a nightmare,
right? I do a lot
of XML processing and PHP
these days because there's simple
XML and you just use
it as a data structure.
Exactly what I want to
do. Right. At the same
time, I find that a
lot of the new language
designs are not paying attention
to some of the really
great work that was done
even before I was around
in university, having to do
with closures and full objects
that way. And so they're
reinventing things in, in sort
of badly. And that bothers
me because I think, you
know, some of those concepts
like languages without closures in,
in, in the two thousands
is just a mistake. I
mean, why would you invent
a new language that didn't
have closures today? Everybody knows
how to implement them, but
knows how useful they are.
And that just boggles my
mind. I'm sort of speechless.
Listen, let's, let's not assume
that every day, every listener
knows what a closure is.
Maybe you could just very
briefly, Right? So what's the
quick definition of a closure.
A closure is a function
without a name that I
can pass around as a
first class object, so I
can make a function and
I can pass it to
you, and then you can
call that function. Right? Right.
So I think that, you
know, the modern languages that
are doing things like adding
link, adding face SQL and
XML and making it easier
and easier for us to
write. I was looking at
a demonstration of the Adobe
flex stuff last spring, and
they've done some amazing things
with how to do, how
to call web APIs without
having to do a lot
of mechanism around it. It's
just built into the language
is how you do that.
That's great. We should have
more of that. But while
we do that, we should
also use some of these
fundamental concepts that were invented
back before they were really
able to be implemented well.
Right. And then I think
that language design typically says,
well, I have this existing
language and then I'm going
to incrementally make it better.
And I, and the people
who do that don't then
don't go back and go,
well, I'm going to make
it better, but I want
to use all the power
I've got. Now, if we
look at computers today, disk
space is free. I mean,
we're recording this podcast onto
a disc, I assume, or
maybe even in a memory
because memory is free, right.
It's actually a two gig
flashcard cost $13. Right. You
know, when, when I first
started writing programs, memory was
fabulously expensive. And so you
had to be very careful
how you wrote your algorithms.
And so things like closures
and languages didn't make a
lot of sense because we
didn't have the raw CPU,
horsepower, the memory to spend
on those data structures. And
we have that now. So
rather than having you or
I do, essentially in our
heads, what the computer could
do, we should have the
computer be doing that work
for us and allow us
to write the simplest clearest
statement of our algorithms that
we're looking for. I've had
some really interesting discussions with
some people internally at Microsoft.
And we did a podcast
on this concept of parallel
link, which is going to
be basically link with an
extra keyword that will recognize
how many cores you have
on your machine and then
scale appropriately. So if you
had a four loop, you
know, you know, for your,
for an a, for each
over a million things, and
you have four cores, it'll
automatically handle all the threading,
the X parallel execution, and
the coming back together, all
that kind of stuff. It
seems like all of us,
Microsoft included kind of the
languages are playing catch up
a little bit, cause no
one ever expected. I mean,
three years ago, I would
never have said that I
would be running a quad
core machine. And now they're
saying 16 core within a
year. Right. And you know,
it used to be, you
you'd have to write four
Tran and then you'd have
to manually unroll all the
loops based on the number
of levels of, of parallels
in your head. So for
instance, if you were programming
a Cray, you, you unrolled
the loop in one way.
And if you were programming
on a, you know, in
a different version of a,
of a, Crane's an XMP
instead of a Y MP,
you'd enroll it a different
way. And now we can
basically almost do that in
hardware. Now you're talking about
doing that in the, in
the interpreter or the compiler,
but you know, some of
these modern Pentium chips almost
do that on rolling in
the hardware itself. Right. And
so that's great. Cause it
removes that level of thinking
that I have to do
as a programmer. Now I
still have to, as a
programmer, write my foreloops in
a way that doesn't re
doesn't create cross iteration dependencies.
Right. Cause otherwise it won't
enroll properly. Right. Right. And
the same thing, you know,
when I'm writing a, a
really high performance piece of
code, I need to think
about how the cache lines
in the processor work. Because
if I access my array
in the wrong order, I
can actually cause it to
do a cash miss on
every access. Whereas if I
rewrite it slightly differently, I
can cause it to do
a cash hit on every
access. Right. And that can
affect the speed of my
program dramatically. But that's, that's
exactly the stuff we shouldn't
have to think about. It
seems like the should, I
should be able to express
my intent in a non
ripping, a dry and in
a way that it's not
a constant myself to repeat
myself, like I just did.
And, and in a, a
simple mechanism that will be
optimized for whatever environment I've
got. If I've had a
low memory environment, it should
be optimized to me, it
should automatically optimize. I feel
like just the fact that
someone could be writing in
a, in a language and
then think about what's going
on in the processor cache,
it's just kind of an
uncomfortable, you shouldn't have a
foot in each world. I
can imagine that, you know,
that's our goal to eventually
have that work. That way.
It's been my experience over
a couple of decades of
doing this, that while we
continue to get better abstractions
and we can require less
thinking of those details in
the end to get the
maximum efficiency, you always have
to think about those details,
the exact details that we
have to think about change.
But you know, even, even
today, when we're thinking about
having say wide area storage
networks where, you know, I'm
using Google or Amazon S
three for my storage instead
of my local disc. Yeah.
That's great. Because it removes
a certain level of needing
to do backups. For instance,
Amazon, some guy runs all
the backups for me, I
guess. Yeah. And they were
up in the clouds And
they're up in the cloud.
But on the other hand,
it takes more time to
get to that for every
access than it does to
get to my local disc
for every access. If it
didn't, you'd use it as
primary storage Uses primary storage,
plus the sheer, the sheer
speed of electrons is going
to prevent me from having,
you know, on your laptop
here, the distance between the
memory and the CPU is
only a couple inches difference
between even if there was
a direct wire between here
in Seattle, the electrons aren't
going to travel that fast.
Right. I mean there's after,
while you approach physical limits.
So I'm just saying that,
I think you're always going
to have to consider some
constraint when you're writing code.
It's just, we'd like to
think of fewer and fewer
of them. Although I didn't
expect myself to be writing
C sharp and thinking about
darn that speed of light
limitation, you know, if we
can just get around, if
we just get around and
see, then maybe I could
get some work done. Yeah.
Although I think that for
majority of your programs, you
don't have to think about
that, right? I mean, we're
talking about, you know, the,
the smallest, lowest power things
you can work on. I
worked for a while for
a chip startup company that
was building chips for cell
phones. And there, it was
really important to optimize the
programs, to use the lowest
possible power because the battery
only has 800 milli amp
hours in it. Right. And
so it wasn't so much
speed as we were programmed
for it, it was reduced
power consumption. And so we
would know how much power
every instruction would take. And
our compiler would tell us
every function, how, how much
power that function would take.
And, you know, because that's,
that was the constraint. When
running inside a cell phone,
I heard that The Linux
guys right now are deeply
involved in a kind of
a system wide power, kind
of an audit. And they're
look they're, they have an
application now that will basically
look at a program and
give you an idea of
how friendly that program is.
For example, I guess they
discovered that the volume slider
was polling in like a
really, really tight loop. So
when you were changing the
volume, your power consumption went
way, way up. So they're
doing some kind of a
system wide thing to look
at all the different applications
so that an application could
be labeled green or not
green. And one could say
that when doing a, a
system wide audit that we've
raised the power lower, the
power consumption by 20% through
good programming practices. So then
power has become yet another
thing to optimize for. That's
really interesting. Yeah. I find
it to be pretty crazy.
My last question for you
back on eclipse before, before
we go, is that, have
you, have you heard any
demand for.net on eclipse or
C sharp on eclipse? Are
there any projects that are
involved? Are there any member
companies that are interested in
providing a.net environment such that
I could use using eclipse
for my.network? So, so far
there's no member company I
know of that's providing a
C sharp environment, but the
people who work on the
C C plus plus tooling
have made a prototype of
a C-sharp tooling and they
actually have it and it's
working and they've actually written
some programs on top of
it so far. There's not
a lot of demand for
C-sharp on eclipse because there's
great C-sharp tools out of
the Microsoft environment, right. But
it's definitely been proven to
work and you can, you
know, write your programs and
run them and debug them.
And you know, the whole
thing Definitely you found the
Aptana application to be a
good compliment to visual studio,
even though the new version
of his studio has JavaScript
debugging. One of the things
I thought was amazing about
Aptana is that they'll be
able to tell you in
JavaScript, HTML or CSS, which
browsers will be supported on
for that particular thing. So
if you're using some feature,
it'll, it has a beautiful
IntelliSense that has a column
with a great out or
not great out icon of
the browser that you're about
to use. And you say,
well, look at this, I
want this won't work in
opera, but it will work
in this. And it will
work in that. It's a
gorgeous idea. The Optima guys
are really sharp. And I
think that's an example of
where they've chosen to make
the right level of abstraction
to solve your problems so
that you don't have to
think about them. You know,
if you look at a
more traditional JavaScript editor just
at it's JavaScript, and maybe
it does syntax highlighting and
IntelliSense and so on, but
it's just sort of a
pure JavaScript editor. It doesn't
go further and say, well,
you know, if you're editing
Java script that uses the
dojo framework, what else do
you want to know? Right.
What are the little idioms
that you would use when
doing that? And the attendant
guys have gone a little
bit farther and done that
bit of it. Right? Well,
that's, I think that's a
really great example of what
can be done on eclipse.
And I really appreciate your
taking the time to talk
to me today. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes, and we will see
you again next week. .